This is session 104, Getting Started with
Mac OS X Kernel Programming.
My name is Nik Gervae.
I'm a software engineer
with the I/O Kit team.
Today we're going to be covering the
basics of programming for the kernel.
That includes packaging your code,
installing as well as runtime
considerations in the kernel environment.
Following that,
we're going to get into the kernel
programming interfaces themselves,
starting with drivers using the I/O Kit,
and then we'll cover file system
plugins and network kernel extensions.
This first part, as mentioned,
is developing for the kernel.
Now, we know there are a lot
of sessions at WWDC,
so we want to get things
out of the way right away,
in case there's someplace
else you'd rather be,
and ask, "Do you need to be here?"
This is largely because kernel
code runs without the protections
afforded to user space programs.
A single mistake can bring the
whole OS down or hang the machine.
So with that in mind,
we've made a lot of things possible
from user space that you might
think require kernel access.
Printer, scanner, and camera drivers,
for example,
are accessible from applications.
And a lot of other kernel services,
such as a lot of USB devices,
are available from user space.
If you're curious about that,
you can check out documentation
on the I/O Kit.framework.
That is a framework that applications
can use to connect to devices.
We want to stress that you should
check user space facilities
before resorting to kernel code.
And do note that running in the kernel
does not make your code run faster.
That is not really a good
reason to run in the kernel.
Considering that,
what does typically require kernel code?
First off is device drivers that
need register access to hardware
or that need to handle interrupts.
And more significantly,
drivers that have clients in the kernel,
of course,
need to run in the kernel so that
they can communicate directly.
Also, most file system plugins,
kernel authorization plugins,
and network stack filters need
to be packaged as kernel code.
The form of that packaging is a bundle.
If you're not familiar with that,
it's a scheme we use on Mac OS X to
package resources together
under a directory that's treated
in the UI as a single file.
So a kernel extension is just a folder.
It's a bundle with a KEXT extension
containing at minimum a
relocatable object file,
in this case, my driver,
and an XML file called Info.plist that
contains the bundle's identifier,
its version, dependencies,
which we'll be covering shortly,
and whatever other information
might be needed for the
subtype of kernel extension.
Xcode makes it easy for you to create
those subtypes with I/O Kit driver and
generic kernel extension project types.
The process of loading a kernel,
because the kernel extension
is basically just a .o file,
we're going to do a static link
and copy it into the kernel's
address space and start it running.
This is how it looks.
In this scenario,
we have the Mach kernel running
and some other KEXTs already
loaded and running in the kernel.
Your driver is sitting on
disk and we want to load it.
So we're going to run the KEXT loader,
which reads that KEXT in that Info.plist,
which contains the library IDs.
Using those library IDs, it looks up the
dependencies of that KEXT,
in this case,
the kernel itself and the library KEXT.
Once it knows those,
it figures out where they're loaded in
the kernel so it can do the relocation.
does it right there,
copies the image into the kernel,
and then invokes a start routine so
that the Kix can start doing its job.
Now,
the dependencies that I mentioned earlier
are declared with OS bundle libraries.
This is just an XML property
whose keys are bundle IDs and
values are the versions needed,
as you can see on the bottom there.
There are two general
kinds of dependencies.
As far as you're concerned,
they're the same thing.
You declare them the same way.
The built-in KPIs are parts of the
kernel that have their own linkage,
and then there are libraries.
You can actually load other kernel
extensions at load time as libraries.
There's a new program in
Leopard called kextlibs,
so when you build your KEXT,
because all of this stuff
is handled at load time,
this will tell you what you
need to declare in your PList
because it isn't done in Xcode.
The interfaces I mentioned,
there are four of them.
First is the Mach KPI.
These are the lowest
level kernel interfaces.
Above that we have Libkern.
Those are utilities for
memories and strings,
atomic operations,
and C++ classes for I/O Kit drivers.
Above that there are two more KPIs.
One is BSD.
This covers interfaces
related to the BSD kernel,
such as networking and file systems.
And then I/O Kit is the core
I/O Kit interfaces and classes.
Now, I/O Kit is really big,
as you're going to find
out in a little bit.
So we break out a lot of its
functionality into libraries
called families that provide
additional interfaces.
All of these headers are in the kernel
framework under the header subdirectory.
This is the only framework
that kernel extensions can use,
and it's only available
to kernel extensions.
Now, you may be asking,
why are we breaking up the
kernel into these subdivisions?
Why not just link to the whole kernel?
The way we do versioning
kind of dictates that.
The Mac OS X kernel is really
big and it has a lot of symbols.
So if you declare your dependency
on the kernel and some symbol
you're not even using changes,
then your KEXT could fail to load.
These subsystems do change
from release-to-release.
The KPI lets you limit that linkage so
that if you're doing a generic KEXT,
it won't be affected by changes
to the I/O Kit and vice versa.
I mentioned a startup routine that gets
called earlier in the kextload slide.
Every KEXT has a startup
function and a shutdown function.
The I/O Kit gives you these
for free with drivers,
but generic KEXTs have to implement them.
When you create your generic KEXT,
Xcode creates placeholders
and you can just fill in the
code that you need to do.
These functions are called automatically
when your KEXT is loaded or unloaded,
and this is where you do
your setup and teardown.
You register and deregister with
whatever facilities you need,
create and destroy
your dynamic resources,
as well as threads for any active
processing you might be doing.
It's important that these
functions do not block.
You shouldn't go into a loop
expecting to do long-term work here.
If you're not going to be doing
active thread processing in your KEXT,
it can serve as a
library for other KEXTs.
You can just create a function package.
The loaders I mentioned,
there's two of them on Mac OS X.
First is the kernel extension server,
kexty.
This handles demand loading of
drivers as requested by the kernel,
basically for I/O Kit drivers in the
system library extensions folder.
The other program is called kextload.
This is for explicit loading by
user space facilities and developers
while you're working on your KEXTs.
It handles generic kernel extensions
no matter where they're installed,
as well as I/O Kit drivers that are
not in the system extensions folder.
The next one is kextload.
kextload has a lot of development
and debugging options.
You're going to be using
-t and -n probably a lot,
because if it fails to load your KEXT,
it's going to print out
a terse little message.
These options together
mean test without loading,
and they will tell you
what's wrong with your KEXT.
Now, once you've finished developing and
debugging your kernel extension,
you're going to want to install it,
probably in the system
library extensions folder.
Because these things run in the kernel,
you want to make sure that they can't
be scribbled on by any old user.
So they need to be owned by the
super user root in group wheel,
and they have to have their
permissions closed so that they're
not writable by group or other.
Again, when you install them,
you want them atomically written
so that partial keks don't
get loaded into the kernel.
So copy them to a temporary directory,
change the owner group and permissions,
and then move them into the
destination folder when you're done.
Once you've done that,
you can reset the keks system.
This is particularly important
for drivers so that they can
get loaded automatically.
You'll run touch on the extensions folder
to update it and invalidate any caches,
and then send a HUP signal,
hang up signal,
to the kernel extension server keksd.
This is required on
Mac OS X 10.3 and later.
On early releases, you need to force a
restart of the system.
Here's a list of the tools that you
might use while developing a KEXT.
First are the kextload program and
then the counterpart kextunload,
the kernel extension server kexty,
and then some others that
you might find helpful.
kextstat lists the kernel extensions
that are currently running in the kernel.
kextlibs, mentioned earlier,
lists the libraries you
need to load your KEXT.
If you make any changes,
you might want to run that
again just to be sure.
And then kextfind is a utility.
If you need to look up some KEXT,
say something that exports a
particular symbol or depends on a
particular symbol or has problems,
you can use that.
It's kind of like find
for kernel extensions.
Now we're going to get into what it's
like to programming in the kernel.
You have to remember that the kernel is
the longest running process in Mac OS X,
and your keks may be
running nearly as long.
It might get loaded as soon as
the machine starts up and not get
unloaded until the machine shuts down.
So it's really important not to leak.
Also, any memory you allocate
is wired by default.
This means it can't be paged to disk,
and it's not available
to user applications.
There's also limited
stack space in the kernel.
When you're programming,
you have to keep that in mind.
So don't allocate any
1K buffers on the stack,
and avoid recursion if you can.
And if you have to use it,
keep it limited.
There are no floating point or
vector facilities in the kernel.
Libc-style support is incomplete.
It's there, but it's pretty minimal.
And there's no file I/O.
Finally, debugging is more complicated
than for user programs.
There's a session in this room after this
one you might want to stick around for.
Texts within the kernel run within the
kernel's 32-bit virtual address space.
There's no sandboxing or virtual
address space protection,
so if you dereference a null pointer
or go into a loop or hit a deadlock,
you're going to panic or
hang the whole user system.
All code running within the
kernel is inherently trusted.
This means it can do pretty
much whatever it wants,
so be careful of that.
Again, if you can't implement
your feature in user space,
please do so.
For more information on
kernel extensions in general,
you can contact Craig Keithley,
our IO technology evangelist,
and check out the WWDC website
for some documentation.
The specific titles you want to look for
if you're getting started are Accessing
Hardware from Applications to find out
if you need to write a kernel extension,
and then the Kernel Programming
Guide and Kernel Extension Concepts,
which has some really good tutorials
to get you started on writing a generic
kernel extension with Hello Kernel or
an I/O Kit driver with Hello I/O Kit.
There's also a lab today
on kernel debugging.
You might want to check that one out.
Now we're going to cover the I/O Kit.
The I/O kit's really big,
so I'm going to give you a
view from about 10,000 feet,
and you'll probably want to dig into
the documentation more to learn,
but let's get started with some of the
basic concepts that you're going to need
to know to understand how things work.
First off,
the I/O Kit is an object-oriented
driver model that we use in Mac OS X.
It's a pretty large set of C++ utility
classes and driver superclasses.
And much like Cocoa and UserSpace,
this is a framework.
This means we implement general
driver functionality already for you.
We've got a set of design
patterns that we use,
and your driver will fill in the
hardware-specific details within
those patterns by overriding
established superclass methods to
do output or input or registering
callbacks for the same purpose.
The I/O Kit system will call
on your driver to control
its device and perform I/O.
As I mentioned,
I/O Kit is implemented in C++,
but it's a limited subset because
it is running within a kernel.
This means we can't do exceptions.
You don't know what thread
your code might be running on,
actually.
There's no multiple inheritance.
The standard RTTI is not included.
We have one that we have developed
for use within the kernel environment.
There's also no standard
template library,
and although we don't use templates,
you can use them in private C++ code.
You just can't use them in
any of your I/O Kit classes.
Now, the I/O Kit defines a class
hierarchy much like Cocoa does.
We have OS object as they have NS object.
This is the class that provides
all of the basic functionality
needed to play with I/O Kit objects,
including dynamic typing, introspection,
reference counting, and lifecycle.
Any class that you implement as a
subclass of a driver superclass,
for example,
is going to inherit from OS object.
If you have a C++ library that is
for use within a kernel environment,
you can use those privately,
but you can't interface with
the I/O Kit using those.
There are also some container and
collection classes from Libkern:
wrappers for numbers, Boolean values,
data buffers and strings,
as well as collections
indexed sets and dictionaries.
Now, we're going to get into
the I/O Kit proper with
the central superclass that
every driver inherits from.
It's called I/O Service.
And this implements the bulk of
general I/O Kit functionality.
There are basically three kinds
of classes in I/O Kit that
you're going to work with.
There's this one, there are the generic
device class superclasses,
and then there's going to
be your specific class.
So I/O Service is the root of this.
And it handles the general functions
of driver lifecycle from matching
and startup of your driver to tear
down when the device is removed.
And it also handles automatic
unloading of your KEXT when you
have no more instances outstanding.
iOS Service also handles the
general principles of power
management and access control.
Below that,
there are a number of families
that implement generic features
of a bus or device class.
Families define superclasses such
as IO Ethernet Controller that
provide the general features of
that class and the abstract methods
that you're going to be overriding.
Your driver,
if you have an Ethernet card,
for example,
you would subclass IO Ethernet
Controller and implement just the
methods that you need to handle
IO and device configuration.
These families are implemented as library
kecks so that if they're not needed,
they won't be consuming wired memory,
and their headers are in kernel
framework headers sub-IO kit.
Down on the bottom there,
you can see a list of the families
we have available on our system.
They cover basically any device or
bus that you might see in a Mac.
Now we're going to get into some
of the actual design patterns
that we use down at the level
you're going to be working with.
The first is a distinction
between subclasses of I/O service.
There are two kinds, and we call this the
device driver pattern.
The first type of object that gets
created when a device is discovered
is called a device object or a nub.
These are completely generic objects.
They represent the baseline
services for a given bus.
For example, I/O PCI device knows that
there's a PCI card in that slot.
It knows nothing else.
They give access to
that bus to find info,
and they provide access to
I/O operations using memory map
registers or whatever that bus provides.
These are typically created by
bus drivers as they scan the bus
to represent those devices in a
completely generic manner so that we
can discover what driver is needed.
You typically don't subclass these.
But once we find out what is needed,
we load your driver,
and that's the driver subclass.
These provide hardware and
I/O control for a specific device.
So this is what would know that
that PCI device is actually
an Ethernet controller,
for example.
The abstract family classes provide
the structure that you would use,
and then your driver subclass handles
the details of the specific device,
for example, my Ethernet controller.
These are attached to the
nub via programmatic link,
and then it uses that nub as its
bus connection to do its I/O.
Here's what the big picture looks like.
You can see the nub right-- oops,
hang on.
Right here, that's the IOPCI device.
In this scenario,
the main logic board driver has
a number of drivers leading up
to the PCI driver down here.
And it scans the bus and finds
out there's a card in slot 2,
so it creates an IO PCI device.
The I/O Kit then figures out
from the PCI configuration
space what drivers are needed,
and for that one we need
my Ethernet controller.
So it creates an instance of your driver
and attaches it onto that PCI device.
Your Ethernet controller would
then publish an IO Ethernet
interface device or nub object,
which then talks to the
BSD networking stack,
which is outside of the scope of I/O Kit.
So as you can see,
IO service objects form a chain
going from the platform driver,
the logic board driver,
up to whatever other facility in
the kernel might be using them.
In this scenario,
my Ethernet controller is
a client of the PCI device,
and this is the provider-client pattern.
And IO PCI device is a provider
to my Ethernet controller.
Basically, provider links go up and
client links go down.
As you can also see from this diagram,
most of these links
alternate between devices.
So if you have a driver
and device objects,
this isn't always the case,
but it's pretty commonly the case.
Every IO service running in the kernel
is connected in this way in a big graph
of objects that we call the IO registry.
And it's not like that other registry,
so don't worry.
As I mentioned, this is a graph of all
I/O service objects in the kernel,
basically running drivers.
Each object has properties that show
the driver's inheritance and state.
Most of them are derived from the
plist of the KEXT when it got loaded.
It can be added or modified
to by registry objects,
including other drivers,
and they contain a lot of
useful diagnostic information
that you might want to use,
whether you're reading it from
kernel space or user space.
In fact, you can use the
I/O registry explorer.app,
which is rewritten in Leopard,
or the ioReg command line tool
to see what's in the registry.
You could learn a lot about the
I/O Kit just exploring the registry.
If you go fish around in there,
you're going to see a
lot of interesting stuff.
Getting outside of the
driver classes themselves,
we've got some support classes to help
you do the I/O that you want to do.
First is a group of
memory management classes,
among them I/O Memory Descriptor
and I/O DMA Command.
There's also I/O Buffering
Memory Descriptor for
allocating long-term buffers.
The main memory management classes
give you structured access to
the memory at various levels
and in device memory as well.
They do address-based translation
from user data buffers and handle
scatter-gather operations as well,
collecting individual smaller buffers
into one larger I/O operation.
For synchronization,
and this is pretty important,
so I'm going to emphasize this,
we have a paradigm that you're
going to want to work within.
Much like in user space,
we have CFRN loop,
in I/O Kit we have I/O Work Loop and
also I/O Event Sources for interrupts,
timers, and commands,
which are client output requests.
These handle serialization
of I/O operations.
They're a key part of the I/O Kit model,
unlike a lot of other OS driver models.
You really want to avoid rolling
your own or trying to get some
other locking scheme from an
existing driver working within this,
because if you try,
you're probably going to get a deadlock.
So, let's talk about the I/O Kit.
That said, I want to show you how simple
I/O can be in the abstract here.
As I mentioned before,
you really just have to subclass
and override a method to do your
output and register an event
source to handle your input.
So when your driver gets created,
you're going to register an event source
or two or three or however many you need,
maybe one for a timer if you need
to pull or one for interrupts if
your device is interrupt-driven.
You'll set those up in your
work loop using the event
source and service methods.
And then when you do that,
you provide the address
of a callback method.
So whenever that interrupt occurs
or whenever the timer goes off,
that method will get called.
Similarly,
output commands coming down from clients
get set up in a command event source,
and you implement these just
by overriding an abstract
family output method.
You know, I/O Ethernet controller,
for example, has output packet.
In both cases,
these methods are called within a work
loop synchronization context for use.
So you don't have to worry
about synchronization.
It's handled for you.
If you need to handle optimization,
if you really need to get things working,
there are some ways to do that,
and you can find that
in the documentation.
and that was the
I/O Kit from 10,000 feet.
We hope you got something out of that.
If you want to find out more,
you can talk to Craig Keithley,
and the documentation to check
out on the attendee site would
include Getting Started with
Hardware and Drivers,
I/O Kit Fundamentals, and
I/O Kit Device Driver Design Guidelines.
Those include the view from
probably 50 feet down to zero.
And if you want a view from 1,000 feet,
last year we had a talk on I/O Kit called
Writing Device Drivers for Mac OS X.
That is available at ADC on
iTunes at that URL right there.
So there we go.
I'm going to hand things off.
Well, list of labs.
We've got a lot of labs, mostly on USB,
Bluetooth, and AirPort.
and now Ramesh,
Ananthakrishna Ramesh is going to
come up and talk about file system
plugins and kernel authorization.
Good morning.
My name is Ramesh.
I'm a senior software
engineer in the kernel team.
Today I'm going to talk about non-IOKit
and the non-networking kernel extensions,
that is the file system and the
kernel authorization plugins.
Before I actually start
on either one of them,
I would like to go over some
of the KPIs which are generic
for all BSD kernel extensions.
They may look a little different than
what you're used to in other platforms,
but they're essentially the same.
The first thing that I want to go
over is the memory allocation APIs.
The header file to include
is the libkern os-malloc.h,
and the dependency to declare
is the libkern symbol set.
And BSD kernel extensions can
allocate pageable or wire memory,
and the first thing that
anybody needs to do to allocate
memory is to allocate a tag.
To allocate a tag,
you call os-malloc tag-alloc
and provide a unique string that
represents your kernel extension,
and then the flags field there
takes whether it's pageable or not.
This routine returns you a tag.
You use this tag to go with malloc,
which allocates the memory for
the size that you're asking for.
And then you can use os-free to free
this memory that you just allocated.
And the reason why we use the tag
is to associate the memory that is
allocated to a kernel extension and
also keep track of how much memory has
been allocated to a kernel extension.
The next KPI that I want to talk
about is the locking primitives.
The kernel provides
three locking primitives,
the mutexes, simple locks, or spin locks,
or read/write locks.
The way to allocate a mutex
is lock_mutex_alloc_init,
which actually returns the
initialized allocated mutex handle.
And as you notice,
there are two arguments for
the lock_mutex_alloc_init,
the lock_group_structure and
the lock_attribute_structure.
The lock_group_structure is very
similar to the tag that you provide
a unique string to allocate a group,
and you can also set whether
you want statistics or not
for that group of locks.
And the lock attribute is
a way to dynamically use,
at the runtime,
whether a particular lock should
be running in a debug mode or not.
Then once you get the
handle to the lock_mutex,
you can use lock_mutex_lock_to_lock
and lock_mutex_unlock_to_unlock.
And then to free the mutex,
you call lock_mutex_free.
And the spin and the read/write
lock variants are similar.
The mutexes in Mac OS X actually spin
for a while if the mutex is held by a
thread that's running on the other core.
We also do priority
boosting for the mutex.
So that's actually the
preferred synchronization
primitive that I recommend.
The spin locks are strongly
discouraged because they block
preemption as well as interrupts.
That could affect the interrupt
latencies on the system as well as
the response to the real-time threats.
So I would encourage you to
avoid using the spin lock.
There are a few more KPIs that
I would like to point out.
One is the msleep and wakeup,
where it's to do a sleep and wakeup.
For the msleep, you pass a mutex,
which actually asserts the event and
then drops the mutex before it blocks.
And there are two kinds of time routines.
One is the system time,
and the other is calendar time.
System time is the time
since the last boot.
Micro-op time actually gives
the time since the last boot,
which is a lot faster than
the calendar-based time.
And if we're just looking for a timestep,
you could use micro-op time
rather than the calendar time.
And of course,
the calendar time is actually
needed for the file systems,
like when a file was created,
the date and time for the file.
And if you want to use the timeout
function to set up a timeout,
you can use the thread call APIs.
You do a thread call allocate
to allocate a callout structure,
and then do a thread call enter
to set up your timeout function.
To do the data movement between
the kernel and the user,
you can use a copy-in, copy-out.
What I want to point out
in that is the copy-in,
copy-out actually take the
64-bit user address space,
even though the user application that
you may be writing to is just 32-bit.
So please make sure that you include
the proper prototypes so that you
don't have any trouble for the bit
sign extension or something like that.
And the UI Word data structure-- the data
structure is an opaque data structure.
There are constructors and
deconstructors available in the KPI,
but I think, generically,
for a file system,
all they use is the UI move
to copy the data out from
the kernel of the user space.
Now I'd like to talk a little
bit about the file system.
First thing that I want to
talk about is what all-- if one
wants to implement file system,
what all pieces are necessary.
There are a few things that
are specific to Mac OS X,
and then the rest of them
are similar to others.
I'm going to take an example
of the local file systems,
because the remote file system almost
somewhat fall into the same pattern.
Of course,
you would need a kernel extension,
which resides in system robbery
extension for the file system.
And along with the kernel extensions,
you also need a file system bundle,
which is in system robbery file systems.
And in this bundle, there are two things
that I want to highlight.
One is the utility function,
and then the Info.plist.
The utility function for the local
file systems is basically you
need to support three arguments.
There's -p, -m, and -u.
-p is the probe.
If you give--when the utility
function is invoked with -p option,
it verifies to see whether
the given volume is supported
by this file system or not.
And if it does, it actually returns the
volume name to the caller.
The Info.plist has
lots of different keys.
The values that you can write.
And a few things that I want
to point out is the fsname,
which is actually the name of the volume
format that the file system supports.
And then the probe order,
the order in which--if
a new volume arrives,
you know,
the order in which the different
file system needs to be probed to
find out whether that volume is
supported by any of the file systems.
And of course,
there are in the /sbin directory,
they will have three boundaries,
the file system checker FSEK,
which needs to support -q option
just to quickly verify whether
the volume is clean or dirty.
And then the new UFS is to layout
in file system on a new volume,
and then the mount to
mount the file system.
I just want to quickly go over
and see how all these different
components work together.
When the new device volume appears,
I/O Kit notifies the disk
arbitration demon in the user space,
which then calls the utility
function with the -p option.
And if the file system actually is -
the volume has the file system that the
particular kernel extension supports,
then it returns success
with the volume name.
And this is where the provider
for the Info.plist is actually
used to look one after the other.
Then the disk arbitration calls
FSEK with -q option to see
whether it's clean or dirty.
If it's actually volume is clean,
it actually goes and
mounts the file system.
If the volume is not clean,
it actually runs the FSEK to clean up
the volume before it actually mounts.
Once the mount is successful,
it actually notifies the finder and
finder puts the desktop icon on the
sidebar as well with the volume name.
that was actually passed
from the utility function.
The unmounting of the file system,
the way it works is once, for example,
a user drags the icon to the
trash or clicks on the eject,
the finder notifies the disk arbitration,
which then in turn notifies
all the clients who are
interested in that volume.
And the purpose of this is the clients
can actually withhold the unmounting if
they actually want to hold it for some
particular reason or to drop all the
references that they have on the volume
so that the volume can be unmounted.
If there are no dissenters,
then the disk arbitration goes and
calls the unmount of the file system.
If the unmount succeeds,
it notifies the finder,
which then takes the icon out
from the desktop and the sidebar.
Mac OS X implements
BSD/VFS style file system.
For some of you who are not familiar,
I'm going to just give you a very
quick highlight of what that is.
The user level actions actually
come to kernel as a system
call to the system call layer,
and then the file system related
activities comes to a generic layer
in the kernel called VFS layer.
This generic layer is same
for all the file systems.
It then calls the corresponding
file system to do a specific action.
It calls a routine which
does a specific action.
In fact, the files,
the core of the file system
is implemented as a set,
series of such routines with each one
of them doing a specific operation.
And there are two sets.
One set that actually operates
on the individual file level,
which is called VNode Operations.
The file itself is represented
inside the VFS layer and the
kernel by a VNodeT data structure.
And the examples of this is, you know,
the VNode operations open, read, write,
delete, you know, things like that.
I actually want to point out
one more VNode operation.
That's the lookup operation,
which I'm going to use
in an example in a bit.
The user opens a file or does an
action in the file with a path name.
The path name consists of all
the name components separated
by a separator character slash.
The lookup operation,
which is the one that performs to
translate from this name component
to a file system node number,
and then construct a file system
node and then associates a
VNode with that particular file.
And then all further operations
on that file happens using the
VNodes in the VNode operations.
The second set of routines,
that is the ones that
operate on the volume level,
and they're called VFS operations.
And the volume itself is
represented in the files,
in the VFS layer and the kernel
by MountT data structure.
And the examples of that is Mount,
MountVolume and MountVolume,
write all the dirty data to
the disk for all the files
that haven't been written yet.
And of course, lastly,
the file system will also have the
module start and stop functions.
There are some few things that
are really very different in
Mac OS X compared to other file
systems that you may be used to.
I would like to point a few of them.
All the generic data structures are
completely opaque to the file system.
The file system has no,
doesn't know how the data structures are,
you know, laid out or anything like that.
There are KPIs to manipulate them and
use them to do the file system work.
There are three kinds of KPIs.
There's accessor KPIs.
You know, which access to individual
fields that are relevant.
And then there's also functional
which does some particular
functions in the convenience API.
So I'll give you a few
examples in the next slide.
All the vNode operations are symmetric.
All the vNodes that come to vNode
operations come with a reference
and they go back of the vNode
operations with the reference.
And they're all lockless.
The vNode actually
enters with no lock held.
There's actually no serialization done
that way for the vNode operations.
And that brings to my next point.
The locking that we apply in
the VFS layer is completely
transparent to the file system.
The file system doesn't know anything
about locking and the vice versa.
The VFS layer does not impose
any particular locking scheme
on the file system nodes.
File systems are completely
free to implement any locking
scheme that they want to protect
their own data structures.
For example,
HFS Extended uses Rediriter locks
to protect and there are other
file systems that uses mutex to
protect their file system nodes.
All the block numbers
in the file system node,
the file system node numbers,
interfaces between the VFS layer
and the file systems are all 64 bit.
And all the vNode operations
are called with the opaque data
structure called VFS context,
which contains the marker that
is necessary for authorization
for the user of that particular
operation at that point of time.
The header file to the rough interest
here is the sysmode.h from the kernel
framework for the VFS KPIs and the
vnode.h for the vnode-level KPIs.
I just want to point out vnode-if.h,
which is actually
included in the vnode.h,
where it actually provides all the
descriptors and arguments that are called
for the different vnode operations.
And the symbol set to declare
is the BST symbol set.
I'm going to take a sequence of
operations just to give you a overview
of how the basic file system works.
The sequence that I'm going to
follow is the file system gets
loaded and it gets mounted.
A file gets looked up in the file
system and that file gets deleted and
the volume gets unmounted and then
eventually the file system gets unloaded.
First the kex gets loaded.
When the kex gets loaded,
the file system specific
start/stop function gets called in.
And this is the place where the file
system needs to register to the VFS,
the file system with the KPI VFS FSR.
It actually provides a list of
the VFS ops and the VNode ops
that it actually implements.
And this is a good place to allocate the
malloc tags and the group structures and
create anything that you need for the
entire file system via data structures.
When the volume gets mounted,
it comes to the VFS layer,
which actually creates the mount data
structure and fills in all the few
fields that are relevant at that point
in time and then calls the file system.
file system VFS mount VFS up,
and it passes this mount
data structure to that.
One of the things that happens in
this is it creates its own file system
specific to the mount data structures,
and then it calls a KPI to
associate between the file
system specific data structure to
the generic mount data structure.
The KPI is VFS set FS private,
and that sets up an
association between the two.
All the VFS hops get called
with the mount T as an argument,
and to get back from the mount data
structure the file system specific data
structure you call VFS FS private and
pass the mount data structure to it.
When a user starts a
file inside the volume,
then it comes into a
lookup data structure,
lookup vNode operation,
which then looks up, you know,
let's assume that actually the
file has never been used before,
so it's not in the name cache
or in the file system cache.
It actually translates the name to the
file of FSNode number and then goes,
reads the FSNode data from a disk,
and then sets up this FSNode completely.
And in the very end of this operation,
it calls the KPI called vNode
create and passes the FSNode and the
other relevant information like the
file type and all kinds of stuff.
Then the vnode create actually
creates the vnode and associates
the file system node with the vnode.
At this point of time,
the vnode is completely
visible in the system.
All other operations can happen.
That's why it's important
to do it in the end.
All the bnode operations are called
with the bnode as an argument.
To get back to your file system,
nodeU is a KPI to bnodeFSNode.
If a user deletes a file,
then it calls a remove
operation of the file system,
which then basically,
first thing it does is it
takes it out of the name space.
It basically purges from the name
cache and the file system cache
that nobody else can find them.
There may be still
references to the VNode,
so all it does is it actually
calls a VNode recycle.
This slide is slightly wrong.
It's actually not VNode reclaim,
it's VNode recycle.
KPI, which then marks the
VNode for termination.
When all the users of that particular
file are completely out of the system,
then the VFS layer calls a VNode
operation called reclaim VNode operation,
which then is free to free
up all the data structures.
The first thing that it does
is to dissociate between the
VNode and the file system node,
and then it can free up all the
file system level data structure
and resources that it has.
And then the reclaim operation
returns back to the VFS layer,
which then frees up the generic
data structure and any resources
that the VFS layer has.
This is just to show, you know,
the VNode is alive across
the whole VNode operation,
and VNode is currently to be
alive when the VNode operation
happens for a file system.
When the volume gets unmounted,
it comes to the unmount
VFS operation in the VFS,
which basically first dissociates
the file system mount data
structure to the generic mount
data structure by VFS set private,
FS private.
And then it frees up the file
system level mount data structures.
And then once this VFS operator,
the VFS layer then cleans
up everything else,
mount structure and
rest of the resources.
When the KEXT itself gets unloaded,
it can actually call,
its stop function gets called,
which can then re-register the
The file system for VFS by
calling VFS/CFS remove.
( Transcript missing )
Good morning.
I'm Laurent Dumont.
I work in the networking in CoreOS,
Mac OS X CoreOS.
So we're gonna talk about
the networking KPIs.
And the first thing I wanna, um,
you know,
look at here is a little bit how the
networking stack is working in Mac OS X.
So here we got a--a picture that
kind of split some of the layers,
um, that we have in the kernel--
in the BSD part of the
kernel for the networking.
So you can see that at the top,
we get the socket layer,
which inside the kernel is responding
to the user sockets and also,
you know, handling, buffering,
and so on for your sockets.
And in the middle of that,
we get the protocol layer.
Here we have IP and IPv6 that, you know,
does all the protocol stuff.
And at the lower, um, level,
we get the interface layer,
which handle all the particularity of,
you know, Ethernet or, you know,
PPP and all those kind of tunnels
and all those kind of interface.
And so-- so we show here that, um,
this is on top of the I/O Kit layer.
So Nick, uh, earlier talked about,
you know, how to do your Ethernet
driver in I/O Kit,
and that would be at this level here.
That would interface
with the interface layer.
So what we'll see is that
we have different levels of,
uh, KPI here that, um,
basically give you access at different,
you know, um, area in the networking, um,
subsystem, if you want.
So in blue here, you can see socket,
socket filter, IP filters, uh,
plumbers that are used, you know,
for associating your interface filter,
and also interface
filter and the interface.
So we'll--we'll do a quick
overview of all those,
um, level of KPIs and see how you can,
you know, with your CACs, um, you know,
plug in in there and--and, you know,
do different--different types of, uh,
of networking, um, operations.
So first,
what we want to say here is that
in the kernel and in the KPI,
all the structures are all opaque.
So basically,
you'll get some handles and you
won't be able to see what's inside
a socket or inside any of the other
things that we have in the kernel.
And we'll provide some
accessors so that you can,
let's say, look at what's in an MBuf,
or things like that.
And we do that for
binary compatibilities.
That way,
we can make sure that your kex is going
to work in a subsequent version if we
change something in the structures.
And for Leopard,
we changed a lot of things.
And that's why we don't want you to be
able to access inside the structures.
All the KPI definition we're
going to talk about here are
all in the kernel frameworks.
And common to all the KPI for networking,
we use data on the form of MBuf.
So if you're familiar-- if you're
familiar with BSD networking,
you know what an MBuf is.
The difference here is that we'll
have some accessors to look at
what's going on with the MBuf and
access some of the fields instead
of directly accessing the MBuf.
structure.
So first, we'll look at the socket,
at the socket KPI.
So the socket KPI pretty much lets
you use sockets in the kernel.
So you can have an application which
is doing the use for socket like doing,
you know, read and write and, you know,
your own socket.
So you can do your own
client in the kernel.
And it's only for socket clients.
So you cannot do a listener or a
server in the kernel because we
don't have support for a lot of
the primitives that we have in user
land for socket for doing a listen.
So we don't have things like, you know,
select or something like that.
So but otherwise,
the life cycle for socket,
you have pretty much everything you need.
You can create, set options,
do a connect, do a send, a receive,
or a close.
And some, you know,
all those KPIs are in the KPI socket .h.
stage.
So here we'll see an example of how
you create a socket in the kernel.
So you call here the
sock socket function.
And the difference compared to,
let's say, calling socket in userland is,
here we're creating a TCP socket.
And you're going to provide, if you want,
an upcall function,
which is going to be called back
from the kernel each time we
have an event for that socket.
Let's say you get connected
or you get a read.
You'll get called in that callback.
You can also provide your own cookie
where you can decide of the state of
your socket or whatever information you
want to stash away and recognize that
socket by calling sock socket here.
Here, it's what's going on when,
let's say, we get the read,
and we're in the input,
and we're getting some data coming in.
So we're calling your up call function.
And here, as you can see here,
you get your cookies.
So you're looking at, hey,
I'm in a connected state.
And now you're going to call another KPI,
which is a soc read,
to do the actual read
and get the data and,
you know, do whatever you want
with the data after that.
You have to be a little careful
about locking and all those
kind of things because here,
you call on the input thread,
and you need to take care of your
own locking for your own data.
All the socket state from
the kernel point of view,
it's all, you know, consistent.
And we're taking care of
the locking for the socket.
But you need to make sure that
you're taking care of the locking
for your own structures that you
manipulate associated with the socket.
( Transcript missing )
layer.
So another layer -- another level of
KPIs that we have here is the IP filter.
So the IP filter,
it's -- it lets you do a
certain number of things,
because now you have access to
data as it's seen by the protocols.
So you can -- you know,
you have -- you see reassembled inbound
IP packets when they're coming in.
And you also see outbound IP packets
when they're going out to the interface.
You can put your filters there and also,
you know, do that before and after both
the IPsec encryption and all the
encapsulation if there is any.
So you got different levels in
the IP filter where you can,
you know, put your KPI and decide
what to do and manipulate.
You got full access to
the IP layer header.
So you can change the checksum.
You can change the destination.
You have a lot of possibilities that
you can do in your -- in your text.
With this KPI.
The life cycle of the KPI,
you attach and you -- or
you detach to the IPv4,
IPv6.
So you decide which kind of
packets you're interested in.
And then you get called in, you know,
when there's something at your level.
The locking, you know, same thing.
You have to drop your locks before
you inject data into the stack.
And you're responsible
for locking your own data.
And the framework for it,
the kernel framework,
it's in the KPI IP filter.
We're going really fast.
But there's a lot of KPI.
So it's just an overview.
So the other -- the other level here
of -- of KPI we have for networking
is that the interface filter.
So the interface filter is a level
down where basically you can access
data as it's seen for the interface.
So you can filter inbound
and outbound packets.
And we're not talking here
before for the IP filter.
We're talking about IP packets.
Now we're talking about
front end packets.
So you can access to the Mac, you know,
link layer and the other depending
on the type of interface.
And you get access to the
interface IOCtl in this layer
also when you do your filter.
Some of the common use
for that KPI is doing,
you know, packet layer firewall where you
can have full access to the packet.
And also things like
virtual packet switch,
like things like, you know,
like parallel stuff like that.
They use -- they use interface filters.
So this -- all the definition for
this is in the KPI interface filter.h.
Another level of KPI here is to
do your own network interface.
So,
You can do a network interface
BSD style which would work with a
stack which is not an I/O Kit driver
because let's say you're doing
a tunneling device or something like
that that doesn't really need to have
any physical access to a media which
sits on top of Ethernet or sits on
top of let's say PPP or what have you.
This is how we implement things like the
bounding interface and stuff like that.
So here what you can do,
you can create your own IF-NET interface.
So you get access and you get to
provide a function for inputting and
outputting packets from I/O Kit or not.
So you get packets from I/O Kit and
you decide to change them or
if you're sitting on another
interface or another tunnel,
then you'll get those packets.
You get to provide a DMUX also so we can
handle the add and remove of protocols.
So if there's a new protocol coming up,
you need to provide a
DMUX let's say for IPv6.
So maybe your interface is handling
IPv6 differently than IPv4.
So you get to provide
the DMUX or Apple talk.
You also do the framing for the
outbound packets in that layer.
So in your interface,
you will be called in and do the framing.
Also, you have to handle I/O CTLs like
the multicast if it's just something
like Ethernet and you want to
emulate something like multicast
on the wire or on your interface,
you get access to the -- you get to
provide access to the I/O CTL for the
multicast or also for the state change
if your interface goes down or goes up,
those kind of things.
The KPI for this is in
the KPI interface.h.
And there is more interface-related
accessor in that KPI interface,
things that let you access IF-NET type
stuff like the stats for the interface,
and add statistics, you know,
because you get some packets that you
refuse or some packets you filter.
All that is in KPI interface.h.
Another level here which is
kind of associated with the
interface KPI is a plumber KPI.
So the KPI is basically the glue between
your interface and an existing protocol.
Let's say you're providing a new
type of interface and you need
a new form of arping for IP,
you would provide that
in the protocol plumber.
So you register your plumb and
unplumb functions with the plumber.
And so you attach that to
a protocol to an interface.
And also you get called when you
want to unplumb for detaching
the protocol from the interface.
And one word of warning here is that this
is not a KPI for adding new protocols.
We don't have that.
So this is for existing protocol but
a different type of interface that has
different requirements like arping,
I think.
So mainly.
And so those are in the KPI protocol.h.
Also, I want to mention here some
ways for you as a KPI to inject
new packets you're creating,
let's say, in the protocol layer in your
interface or any other place
you want to create some packets,
so you get some packets that you want
to inject because you're a tunnel,
you're going to call proto input,
which is a function where
you pass the packet.
And this is what you call
from the inbound pass,
so, you know,
simulating something that is
coming in from the physical,
you know, the driver layer.
And also, if you're in a kex and you're
trying to send a packet,
you know, in,
but you're on the outgoing side,
you're going to call protocol inject.
And if you're familiar
with the BSD kind of model,
it replaces a little bit the NetISR.
This is the protocol inject
that you will call in that case.
And those are in the KPI protocol.h.
The other thing that we have here,
which is a KPI that is used for
communicating with your kegs pretty much.
It's a kernel control socket.
So it's a special type of socket that
we use to communicate with user space.
So you can use that to configure
some setting in your kegs or
get some information about,
let's say,
we're talking about earlier about
getting your connect and deciding if we
wanted to allow or not the application
to connect to a certain address.
You can use the kernel control
socket to send that information
back to a daemon in user space and
get that information and get it
back on the kind of a side channel.
So they're pretty useful for this.
There's some locking consideration to
think about is that those kernel sockets,
control sockets are not serialized.
So you need to be careful about that.
But it's safe to send to
your client at any time.
So whatever context you're getting in,
you can do a send back to your
client and they will get it.
And we mentioned it here.
It's in the kernel control dot H that
you'll see all the KPI associated
with kernel control sockets.
( Transcript missing )
For more information--
that was really fast.
But for more information,
you can contact Craig Kistley,
which is the technology evangelist.
And some documentation,
sample codes are on the website.
The TCP log NKE is a good
NKE to look at how to do a KPI.
And the network extension programming
guide is going to give you also some more
in-depth information than we can do here.